Update the metrics analytics documentation (#7352)
opensearch-project/documentation-website: _observing-your-data/metricsanalytics.md

---
layout: default

> title: Metrics analytics

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Metric analytics
```

nav_order: 40
redirect_from:
  - /observing-your-data/metricsanalytics/
---

> # Metrics analytics

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Metric analytics
```

Introduced 2.4
{: .label .label-purple }

> With the release of OpenSearch 2.4, you can now ingest and visualize metrics data stored directly within OpenSearch using the **Metrics analytics** tool. This equips you with tools to analyze and correlate data across logs, traces, and metrics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the release of OpenSearch 2.4, you can now ingest and visualize metric data stored directly in OpenSearch using the **Metric analytics** tool. This equips you with tools to analyze and correlate data across logs, traces, and metrics.
```

> With the release of OpenSearch 2.4, you can now ingest and visualize metrics data stored directly within OpenSearch using the **Metrics analytics** tool. This equips you with tools to analyze and correlate data across logs, traces, and metrics.

Reviewer: Global: It should be "metric data" rather than "metrics data", but if "metric data" and "metrics" are synonymous, then we should just use "metrics" throughout.

Reviewer 2: I accepted your edits to use metric

> Before this feature, you could only ingest and visualize logs and traces from your monitored environments. With **Metrics analytics**, you can now observe your digital assets with more granularity, gain deeper insight into the health of your infrastructure, and better inform your root cause analysis.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before the introduction of this feature, you could only ingest and visualize logs and traces from your monitored environments. With **Metric analytics**, you can now observe your digital assets with more granularity, gain deeper insight into the health of your infrastructure, and better inform your root cause analysis.
```

Reviewer 2: The tool proper name is **Metrics**. I'll update bold name and use metric  in generic form.

> **Metrics analytics** offers federated visualization capabilities on top of the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Metric analytics** offers federated visualization capabilities in addition to the following:
```

 - An OpenSearch cluster containing an [OpenTelemetry (OTel)-compatible metrics index](https://github.com/opensearch-project/opensearch-catalog/tree/main/docs/schema/observability/metrics) with OTel-based signals. See [What is OpenTelemetry?](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/what-is-opentelemetry/) for an overview of OTel.
 - An OpenSearch cluster containing a [Prometheus data source](https://github.com/opensearch-project/sql/blob/main/docs/dev/datasource-prometheus.md) connected to a Prometheus server. 

The following image displays the flow for retrieving metrics from Prometheus and displaying them on a visualization dashboard.

<img src="{{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/images/metrics/prom-metrics.png" alt="Prometheus data source" width="700"/>

> The following image displays an observability dashboard that visualizes metrics data from the OpenSearch index using OTel queries.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following image displays an observability dashboard that visualizes metric data from the OpenSearch index using OTel queries.
```

<img src="{{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/images/metrics/otel-metrics.png" alt="OTel data source" width="700"/>

---

> ## Configuring Prometheus to send metrics data to OpenSearch

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Configuring Prometheus to send metric data to OpenSearch
```

> You must first create a connection from [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/) to OpenSearch using the [SQL plugin](https://github.com/opensearch-project/sql). You can then configure a connection to Prometheus by using the `_datasources` configuration API endpoint. 

Reviewer: In "`_datasources` configuration API endpoint", should "Configuration" be capitalized, or can "configuration" be removed?

Reviewer 2: can be removed

> The following example shows a request that sets up a Prometheus data source without any authentication:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following example shows a request that configures a Prometheus data source without any authentication:
```

> The following example shows a request that sets up a Prometheus data source without any authentication:

Reviewer: "sets up" => "configures"?

```json
POST _plugins/_query/_datasources 
{
    "name" : "my_prometheus",
    "connector": "prometheus",
    "properties" : {
        "prometheus.uri" : "http://localhost:9090"
    }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

> The following example shows how to set up a Prometheus data source using AWS Signature Version 4 authentication:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following example shows how to configure a Prometheus data source using AWS Signature Version 4 authentication:
```

> The following example shows how to set up a Prometheus data source using AWS Signature Version 4 authentication:

Reviewer: "set up" => "configure"?

```json
POST _plugins/_query/_datasources
{
    "name" : "my_prometheus",
    "connector": "prometheus",
    "properties" : {
        "prometheus.uri" : "http://localhost:8080",
        "prometheus.auth.type" : "awssigv4",
        "prometheus.auth.region" : "us-east-1",
        "prometheus.auth.access_key" : "{{accessKey}}"
        "prometheus.auth.secret_key" : "{{secretKey}}"
    }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

> After setting up the connection, you can view Prometheus metrics in OpenSearch Dashboards by going to the **Observability** > **Metrics** page, as shown in the following image.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After configuring the connection, you can view Prometheus metrics in OpenSearch Dashboards by going to the **Observability** > **Metrics** page, as shown in the following image.
```

> After setting up the Prometheus to OpenSearch connection, you can view Prometheus metrics in OpenSearch Dashboards by going to the **Observability** > **Metrics analytics** page, where the metrics will be displayed, similar to the following image.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After setting up the connection, you can view Prometheus metrics in OpenSearch Dashboards by going to the **Observability** > **Metrics analytics** page, as shown in the following image.
```

> After setting up the Prometheus to OpenSearch connection, you can view Prometheus metrics in OpenSearch Dashboards by going to the **Observability** > **Metrics analytics** page, where the metrics will be displayed, similar to the following image.

Reviewer: "setting up" => "configuring"?

<img src="{{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/images/metrics/metrics1.png" alt="Prometheus metrics displayed on a dashboard" width="700"/>

### Developer resources

See the following developer resources for sample code, articles, tutorials, and API references:

* [Datasource Settings](https://github.com/opensearch-project/sql/blob/main/docs/user/ppl/admin/datasources.rst), which contains information about authentication and authorization of data source APIs.
* [Prometheus Connector](https://github.com/opensearch-project/sql/blob/main/docs/user/ppl/admin/connectors/prometheus_connector.rst), which contains configuration information.
* [Simple Schema for Observability](https://github.com/opensearch-project/opensearch-catalog/tree/main/docs/schema/observability), which contains information about the OTel schema and ingest pipeline.
* [OTel Metrics Source](https://github.com/opensearch-project/data-prepper/tree/main/data-prepper-plugins/otel-metrics-source), which contains information about the Data Prepper metrics pipeline and ingestion.

---

> ## Experimenting with OTel Metrics in the OpenSearch demo environment 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Experimenting with OpenTelemetry Metrics in the OpenSearch demo environment 
```

> The OpenSearch [`opentelemetry-demo` repository](https://github.com/opensearch-project/opentelemetry-demo) provides a practical demonstration of collecting, processing, and visualizing metric data through **OTel Metrics** from OpenTelemetry, following OpenTelemetry standards, and using the **Metrics** tool in OpenSearch Dashboards.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The OpenSearch [`opentelemetry-demo` repository](https://github.com/opensearch-project/opentelemetry-demo) provides a practical demonstration of collecting, processing, and visualizing metric data through **OpenTelemetry Metrics** from OpenTelemetry and using the **Metrics** tool in OpenSearch Dashboards.
```

> The OpenSearch [`opentelemetry-demo` repository](https://github.com/opensearch-project/opentelemetry-demo) is a practical demonstration of collecting, processing, and visualizing metrics data through **OTel Metrics** from OpenTelemetry, following OpenTelemetry standards, and using the **Metrics analytics** tool in OpenSearch Dashboards.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The OpenSearch [`opentelemetry-demo` repository](https://github.com/opensearch-project/opentelemetry-demo) provides a practical demonstration of collecting, processing, and visualizing metric data through **OTel Metrics** from OpenTelemetry, following OpenTelemetry standards, and using the **Metric analytics** tool in OpenSearch Dashboards.
```

> The OpenSearch [`opentelemetry-demo` repository](https://github.com/opensearch-project/opentelemetry-demo) is a practical demonstration of collecting, processing, and visualizing metrics data through **OTel Metrics** from OpenTelemetry, following OpenTelemetry standards, and using the **Metrics analytics** tool in OpenSearch Dashboards.

Reviewer: Is the "following OpenTelemetry standards" phrase necessary, or is this implied? Also, "OpenTelemetry" => "OTel".

### Visualizing OTel metrics in OpenSearch

> To visualize OTel metrics in OpenSearch, follow these steps: 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To visualize OTel metric data in OpenSearch, follow these steps: 
```

> ### Visualizing OTel metrics within OpenSearch

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Visualizing OTel metrics in OpenSearch
```

1. Install the [`opentelemetry-demo` repository](https://github.com/opensearch-project/opentelemetry-demo). See the [Getting Started](https://github.com/opensearch-project/opentelemetry-demo/blob/main/tutorial/GettingStarted.md) guide for instructions.

> 2. Collect the OTel signals, including metrics signals. See the [OTel Collector](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/collector/) guide for instructions.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Collect the OTel signals, including metric signals. See the [OTel Collector](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/collector/) guide for instructions.  
```

> 3. Configure the OTel pipeline to emit metrics signals. See the [OTel Collector Pipeline](https://github.com/opensearch-project/opentelemetry-demo/tree/main/src/otelcollector) guide for instructions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Configure the OTel pipeline to emit metric signals. See the [OTel Collector Pipeline](https://github.com/opensearch-project/opentelemetry-demo/tree/main/src/otelcollector) guide for instructions.
```

#### Example YAML config file

```yaml
    service:
      extensions: [basicauth/client]
      pipelines:
        traces:
          receivers: [otlp]
          processors: [batch]
          exporters: [otlp, debug, spanmetrics, otlp/traces, opensearch/traces]
        metrics:
          receivers: [otlp, spanmetrics]
          processors: [filter/ottl, transform, batch]
          exporters: [otlphttp/prometheus, otlp/metrics, debug]
        logs:
          receivers: [otlp]
          processors: [batch]
          exporters: [otlp/logs,  opensearch/logs, debug]
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}
    

> 4. Configure the [Data Prepper pipeline](https://github.com/opensearch-project/opentelemetry-demo/blob/main/src/dataprepper/pipelines.yaml) to emit the collected metrics signals into the OpenSearch metrics index.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Configure the [Data Prepper pipeline](https://github.com/opensearch-project/opentelemetry-demo/blob/main/src/dataprepper/pipelines.yaml) to emit the collected metric signals into the OpenSearch metrics index.
```

#### Example YAML config file

```yaml
    otel-metrics-pipeline:
      workers: 8
      delay: 3000
      source:
        otel_metrics_source:
          health_check_service: true
          ssl: false
      buffer:
        bounded_blocking:
          buffer_size: 1024 # max number of records the buffer accepts
          batch_size: 1024 # max number of records the buffer drains after each read
      processor:
        - otel_metrics:
            calculate_histogram_buckets: true
            calculate_exponential_histogram_buckets: true
            exponential_histogram_max_allowed_scale: 10
            flatten_attributes: false
      sink:
        - opensearch:
            hosts: ["https://opensearch-node1:9200"]
            username: "admin"
            password: "my_%New%_passW0rd!@#"
            insecure: true
            index_type: custom
            template_file: "templates/ss4o_metrics.json"
            index: ss4o_metrics-otel-%{yyyy.MM.dd}
            bulk_size: 4
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

> 5. Ingest metric data into OpenSearch. As the demo starts generating data, the metric signals will be added to the OpenSearch index that supports the OTel Metrics schema format.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
5. Ingest metric data into OpenSearch. As the demo starts generating data, the metric signals will be added to the OpenSearch index that supports the OpenTelemetry Metrics schema format.
```

> 5. Ingest metrics data into OpenSearch. As the demo starts generating data, the metrics signals will be added to the OpenSearch index that supports the OTel Metrics schema format.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. Ingest metric data into OpenSearch. As the demo starts generating data, the metric signals will be added to the OpenSearch index that supports the OTel Metrics schema format.
```

> 5. Ingest metrics data into OpenSearch. As the demo starts generating data, the metrics signals will be added to the OpenSearch index that supports the OTel Metrics schema format.

Reviewer: If "OTel Metrics" is a proper noun, then it's most likely "OpenTelemetry Metrics".

> 6. On the **Metrics** page, choose `Otel-Index` from the **Data sources** dropdown menu and `Simple Schema for Observability Index` from the **Otel index** dropdown menu. A visualization is displayed, as shown in the following image.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
6. On the **Metrics** page, choose `Otel-Index` from the **Data sources** dropdown menu and `Simple Schema for Observability Index` from the **OTel index** dropdown menu. A visualization is displayed, as shown in the following image.
```

> 6. On the **Metrics analytics** page, choose `Otel-Index` from the **Data sources** dropdown menu and `Simple Schema for Observability Index` from the **Otel index** dropdown menu. A visualization is displayed, similar to the following image.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
6. On the **Metric analytics** page, choose `Otel-Index` from the **Data sources** dropdown menu and `Simple Schema for Observability Index` from the **OTel index** dropdown menu. A visualization is displayed, as shown in the following image.
```

<img src="{{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/images/metrics/otel-metrics.png" alt="OTel metrics dashboard" width="700"/>

---

> ## Visualizing metrics within remote clusters

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Visualizing metrics in remote clusters
```

Introduced 2.14
{: .label .label-purple }

> You can see metrics from remote OpenSearch clusters by using the **Metrics analytics** tool. Select the database icon on the upper-right toolbar and choose the cluster you want from **DATA SOURCES** dropdown menu, as shown in the following image. You can switch from a local cluster to a remote cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can view metrics from remote OpenSearch clusters by using the **Metric analytics** tool. Select the database icon on the upper-right toolbar and choose a cluster from the **DATA SOURCES** dropdown menu, as shown in the following image. You can switch from a local cluster to a remote cluster.
```

<img src="{{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/images/metrics/remote-cluster-selection.png" alt="Switching clusters using the Metrics analytics tool" width="700"/>

> You can also view metrics visualizations from other sources together with local metrics visualizations. From the **DATA SOURCES** dropdown menu, choose the remote metrics visualization to add it to the group of visualizations already shown on the dashboard. An example dashboard is shown in the following image.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also view metric visualizations from other sources alongside local metric visualizations. From the **DATA SOURCES** dropdown menu, choose the remote metric visualization to add it to the group of visualizations already shown on the dashboard. An example dashboard is shown in the following image.
```

<img src="{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/images/metrics/otel-metrics-remote-cluster-selection.png" alt="Metrics dashboard" width="700"/>

To learn about multi-cluster support for data sources, see [Enable OpenSearch Dashboards to support multiple OpenSearch clusters](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch-Dashboards/issues/1388).

## Creating visualizations based on custom metrics

> You can create visuals from the metrics data collected by your OpenSearch cluster, including Prometheus metrics and custom metrics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can create visualizations using the metric data collected by your OpenSearch cluster, including Prometheus metrics and custom metrics.
```

1. From the OpenSearch Dashboards main menu, navigate to **Observability** > **Metrics** > **Available Metrics**.
2. Choose the metrics to add to your visualization and then select **Save**.
3. When prompted for a **Custom operational dashboards/application**, choose one of the listed options. You can edit the predefined name values in the **Metric Name** field.
4. Select **Save** to save your visualization. An example visualization is shown in the following image.

<img src="{{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/images/metrics/metrics2.png" alt="Metrics analytics dashboard with visualizations" width="700"/>

## Defining PPL queries for Prometheus metrics

You can define [Piped Processing Language (PPL)]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/search-plugins/sql/ppl/index/) queries to interact with metrics collected by Prometheus. The following is an example PPL query for a Prometheus metric:

```
source = my_prometheus.prometheus_http_requests_total | stats avg(@value) by span(@timestamp,15s), handler, code
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

### Creating a custom visualization based on the PPL query

To create a custom visualization based on the PPL query, follow these steps:

> 1. In the **Event Analytics** window, enter your PPL query and select **Refresh**. This will display the **Explorer** page.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. From the **Logs** > **Event Explorer** page, enter your PPL query and select **Refresh**. 
```

Reviewer 2: @YANG-DB I don't see an "Events analytics" page in OpenSearch Dashboards. Are we referring to the the following? 
![Uploading Screenshot 2024-06-21 at 9.39.44 AM.png…]()

> 1. From the **Events Analytics** window, enter your PPL query and select **Refresh**. This will display the **Explorer** page.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. In the **Event Analytics** window, enter your PPL query and select **Refresh**. This will display the **Explorer** page.
```

2. On the **Explorer** page, select **Save**.

> 3. When prompted to choose a **Custom Operational Dashboards/Application**, select one of the listed options. Optionally, you can edit the predefined name values under the **Metric Name** fields and can choose to save the visualization as a metric.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. When prompted to choose a **Custom Operational Dashboards/Application**, select one of the listed options. Optionally, you can edit the predefined name values in the **Metric Name** fields and can choose to save the visualization as a metric.
```

Reviewer 2: @YANG-DB Is Events Analytics now Explorer? I don't see a tool named "Events Analytics" listed in Observability.

5. Select **Save** to save your custom visualization. 

> Only queries that include a time-series visualization and statistics or span information can be saved as a metric, similar to the following image.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Only queries that include a time-series visualization and statistics or span information can be saved as a metric, as shown in the following image.
```

To create these visualizations, follow these steps:

1. From the OpenSearch Dashboards main menu, navigate to **Observability** > **Metrics** > **Available Metrics**.
2. Choose the metrics to add to your visualization and then select **Save**.
3. When prompted for a **Custom operational dashboards/application**, choose one of the listed options. You can edit the predefined name values in the **Metric Name** field.
4. Select **Save** to save your visualization. An example visualization is shown in the following image.

![Visualizations displayed in the Metric analytics window]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/images/metrics/metrics2.png)

## Defining PPL queries for Prometheus metrics

You can define [Piped Processing Language (PPL)]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/search-plugins/sql/ppl/index) queries to interact with metrics collected by Prometheus. The following example shows a metric-selecting query with specific dimensions:

```
source = my_prometheus.prometheus_http_requests_total | stats avg(@value) by span(@timestamp,15s), handler, code
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

> ### Creating a custom visualization 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Creating a custom visualization based on the PPL query
```

> To create a custom visualization based on your PPL query, follow these steps:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To create a custom visualization based on the PPL query, follow these steps:
```

![Metrics dashboard]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/images/metrics/otel-metrics-remote-cluster-selection.png)

To learn about multi-cluster support for data sources, see [Enable OpenSearch Dashboards to support multiple OpenSearch clusters](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch-Dashboards/issues/1388).

## Creating visualizations based on custom metrics

You can create visuals from the metrics data collected by your OpenSearch cluster, including Prometheus metrics and custom metrics.

To create these visualizations, follow these steps:

1. From the OpenSearch Dashboards main menu, navigate to **Observability** > **Metrics** > **Available Metrics**.
2. Choose the metrics to add to your visualization and then select **Save**.
3. When prompted for a **Custom operational dashboards/application**, choose one of the listed options. You can edit the predefined name values in the **Metric Name** field.
4. Select **Save** to save your visualization. An example visualization is shown in the following image.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

![Visualizations displayed in the Metric analytics window]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/images/metrics/metrics2.png)

## Defining PPL queries for Prometheus metrics

You can define [Piped Processing Language (PPL)]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/search-plugins/sql/ppl/index) queries to interact with metrics collected by Prometheus. The following example shows a metric-selecting query with specific dimensions:

```
source = my_prometheus.prometheus_http_requests_total | stats avg(@value) by span(@timestamp,15s), handler, code
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

> ### Creating a custom visualizataion 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Creating a custom visualization 
```

---
layout: default
title: Metrics analytics
nav_order: 40
redirect_from:
  - /observing-your-data/metricsanalytics/
---

# Metrics analytics
Introduced 2.4
{: .label .label-purple }

> Starting with OpenSearch 2.4, you can ingest and visualize metric data from metrics data stored directly within OpenSearch, allowing you to analyze and correlate data across logs, traces, and metrics.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With the release of OpenSearch 2.4, you can now ingest and visualize metrics data stored directly within the OpenSearch. This equips you with tools to analyze and correlate data across logs, traces, and metrics.
```

> With the release of OpenSearch 2.4, you can now ingest and visualize metrics data stored directly within the OpenSearch. This equips you with tools to analyze and correlate data across logs, traces, and metrics.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With the release of OpenSearch 2.4, you can now ingest and visualize metrics data stored directly within OpenSearch using the **Metrics analytics** tool. This equips you with tools to analyze and correlate data across logs, traces, and metrics.
```

> Previously, you could ingest and visualize only logs and traces from your monitored environments. With this feature, you can observe your digital assets with more granularity, gain deeper insight into the health of your infrastructure, and better inform your root cause analysis.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Before this feature, you could only ingest and visualize logs and traces from your monitored environments. With this feature, you can now observe your digital assets with more granularity, gain deeper insight into the health of your infrastructure, and better inform your root cause analysis.
```

> Before this feature, you could only ingest and visualize logs and traces from your monitored environments. With this feature, you can now observe your digital assets with more granularity, gain deeper insight into the health of your infrastructure, and better inform your root cause analysis.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Before this feature, you could only ingest and visualize logs and traces from your monitored environments. With **Metrics analytics**, you can now observe your digital assets with more granularity, gain deeper insight into the health of your infrastructure, and better inform your root cause analysis.
```

> The **Metrics analytics** tool offers federated visualization capabilities on top of any of the following:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Metrics analytics** offers federated visualization capabilities on top of the following:
```

>  - An OpenSearch cluster containing an [OpenTelemetry (OTel)-compatible metrics index](https://github.com/opensearch-project/opensearch-catalog/tree/main/docs/schema/observability/metrics) with OTel-based signals. For an explanation of OTel, see [What is OpenTelemetry?](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/what-is-opentelemetry/).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 - An OpenSearch cluster containing an [OpenTelemetry (OTel)-compatible metrics index](https://github.com/opensearch-project/opensearch-catalog/tree/main/docs/schema/observability/metrics) with OTel-based signals. See [What is OpenTelemetry?](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/what-is-opentelemetry/) guide for details about OTel.
```

 - An OpenSearch cluster containing a [Prometheus data source](https://github.com/opensearch-project/sql/blob/main/docs/dev/datasource-prometheus.md) connected to a Prometheus server. 

> The following images show the flow for retrieving metrics from Prometheus and displaying them on a visualization dashboard.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following images shows the flow for retrieving metrics from Prometheus and displaying them on a visualization dashboard.
```

![Prometheus and metrics]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/images/metrics/prom-metrics.png)

> The following image shows OTel metrics stored in an OpenSearch index, using metrics analytics for querying and visualizing the data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following image displays an observability dashboard that visualizes metrics data from the OpenSearch index using OpenTelemetry queries.
```

> ![Otel metrics]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/images/metrics/otel-metrics.png)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
![OTel metrics]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/images/metrics/otel-metrics.png)
```

---

## Configuring Prometheus to send metrics data to OpenSearch

> You must first create a connection from [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/) to OpenSearch using the [SQL plugin](https://github.com/opensearch-project/sql). To configure a connection to Prometheus, you can use the `_datasources` configuration API endpoint. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You must first create a connection from [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/) to OpenSearch using the [SQL plugin](https://github.com/opensearch-project/sql). You can then configure a connection to Prometheus by using the `_datasources` configuration API endpoint. 
```

> You can view metrics collected from Prometheus in OpenSearch Dashboards by first creating a connection from [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/) to OpenSearch using the SQL plugin. To configure a connection to Prometheus, you can use the `_datasources` configuration API endpoint. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To view metrics collected from Prometheus in OpenSearch Dashboards, create a connection from [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/) to OpenSearch using the [SQL plugin](https://github.com/opensearch-project/sql). To configure a connection to Prometheus, you can use the `_datasources` configuration API endpoint. 
```

> To view metrics collected from Prometheus in OpenSearch Dashboards, create a connection from [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/) to OpenSearch using the [SQL plugin](https://github.com/opensearch-project/sql). To configure a connection to Prometheus, you can use the `_datasources` configuration API endpoint. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To view metrics collected from Prometheus in OpenSearch Dashboards, first create a connection from [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/) to OpenSearch using the [SQL plugin](https://github.com/opensearch-project/sql). To configure a connection to Prometheus, you can use the `_datasources` configuration API endpoint. 
```

> To view metrics collected from Prometheus in OpenSearch Dashboards, first create a connection from [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/) to OpenSearch using the [SQL plugin](https://github.com/opensearch-project/sql). To configure a connection to Prometheus, you can use the `_datasources` configuration API endpoint. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You must first create a connection from [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/) to OpenSearch using the [SQL plugin](https://github.com/opensearch-project/sql). To configure a connection to Prometheus, you can use the `_datasources` configuration API endpoint. 
```

> The following example request configures a Prometheus data source with no authentication:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following example shows a request that sets up a Prometheus data source without any authentication:
```

```json
POST _plugins/_query/_datasources 
{
    "name" : "my_prometheus",
    "connector": "prometheus",
    "properties" : {
        "prometheus.uri" : "http://localhost:9090"
    }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

> The following example request configures a Prometheus data source with AWS Signature Version 4 (SigV4) authentication:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following example shows how to set up a Prometheus data source using AWS Signature Version 4 (SigV4) authentication:
```

```json
POST _plugins/_query/_datasources
{
    "name" : "my_prometheus",
    "connector": "prometheus",
    "properties" : {
        "prometheus.uri" : "http://localhost:8080",
        "prometheus.auth.type" : "awssigv4",
        "prometheus.auth.region" : "us-east-1",
        "prometheus.auth.access_key" : "{{accessKey}}"
        "prometheus.auth.secret_key" : "{{secretKey}}"
    }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

> After configuring the connection from Prometheus to OpenSearch, you can view Prometheus metrics in OpenSearch Dashboards. To access these metrics, navigate to **Observability** > **Metrics analytics**. The Prometheus metrics will be displayed in this window, as shown in the following image.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After setting up the Prometheus to OpenSearch connection, you can view Prometheus metrics in OpenSearch Dashboards by going to the **Observability** > **Metrics analytics** page, where the metrics will be displayed, similar to the following image.
```

* [Prometheus Connector](https://github.com/opensearch-project/sql/blob/main/docs/user/ppl/admin/connectors/prometheus_connector.rst), which contains configuration information.
* [Simple Schema for Observability](https://github.com/opensearch-project/opensearch-catalog/tree/main/docs/schema/observability), which contains information about the OTel schema and ingestion pipeline.
* [OTel Metrics Source](https://github.com/opensearch-project/data-prepper/tree/main/data-prepper-plugins/otel-metrics-source), which contains information about the Data Prepper metrics pipeline and ingestion.

---

## Experimenting with OTel Metrics in the OpenSearch demo environment 

The OpenSearch [`opentelemetry-demo` repository](https://github.com/opensearch-project/opentelemetry-demo) is a practical demonstration of collecting, processing, and visualizing metrics data through **OTel Metrics** from OpenTelemetry, following OpenTelemetry standards, and using the **Metrics analytics** tool in OpenSearch Dashboards.

> ### Visualizing OTel metrics in OpenSearch

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Visualizing OTel metrics within OpenSearch
```

> **OTel Metrics** is an OpenTelemetry component for metrics data collection. The OpenSearch [`opentelemetry-demo` repository](https://github.com/opensearch-project/opentelemetry-demo) provides a practical demonstration of how to use OpenSearch components to collect, process, and visualize telemetry data in accordance with the OpenTelemetry standards. You can use the  **Metrics analytics** tool in OpenSearch Dashboards to monitor and visualize OTel Metrics signals.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The OpenSearch `opentelemetry-demo` repository is a practical demonstration of collecting, processing, and visualizing metrics data through **OTel Metrics** from OpenTelemetry, following OpenTelemetry standards, and using the **Metrics analytics** tool in OpenSearch Dashboards.

is an OpenTelemetry component for metrics data collection. The OpenSearch [`opentelemetry-demo` repository](https://github.com/opensearch-project/opentelemetry-demo) provides a practical demonstration of how to use OpenSearch components to collect, process, and visualize telemetry data in accordance with the OpenTelemetry standards. You can use the  **Metrics analytics** tool in OpenSearch Dashboards to monitor and visualize OTel Metrics signals.
```

To visualize OTel metrics in OpenSearch, follow these steps: 

**Step 1: Install the demo**

> Install the OpenSearch [`opentelemetry-demo` repository](https://github.com/opensearch-project/opentelemetry-demo). See the [Getting Started](https://github.com/opensearch-project/opentelemetry-demo/blob/main/tutorial/GettingStarted.md) guide for instructions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Install the [`opentelemetry-demo` repository](https://github.com/opensearch-project/opentelemetry-demo). See the [Getting Started](https://github.com/opensearch-project/opentelemetry-demo/blob/main/tutorial/GettingStarted.md) guide for instructions.
```

#### Example YAML config file

```yaml
    otel-metrics-pipeline:
      workers: 8
      delay: 3000
      source:
        otel_metrics_source:
          health_check_service: true
          ssl: false
      buffer:
        bounded_blocking:
          buffer_size: 1024 # max number of records the buffer accepts
          batch_size: 1024 # max number of records the buffer drains after each read
      processor:
        - otel_metrics:
            calculate_histogram_buckets: true
            calculate_exponential_histogram_buckets: true
            exponential_histogram_max_allowed_scale: 10
            flatten_attributes: false
      sink:
        - opensearch:
            hosts: ["https://opensearch-node1:9200"]
            username: "admin"
            password: "my_%New%_passW0rd!@#"
            insecure: true
            index_type: custom
            template_file: "templates/ss4o_metrics.json"
            index: ss4o_metrics-otel-%{yyyy.MM.dd}
            bulk_size: 4
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

**Step 5: Ingest metrics data into OpenSearch**

> Once the demo starts producing data, the metrics signals will be ingested into the OpenSearch OTel metrics schema-compatible index.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As the demo starts generating data, the metrics signals will be added to the OpenSearch index that supports the OTel Metrics schema format.
```

**Step 6: View metrics data**

> On the **Metrics analytics** page, choose `Otel-Index` from the **Data sources** dropdown menu and `Simple Schema for Observability Index` from the **Otel Index** dropdown menu. This step is shown in the following image.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
On the **Metrics analytics** page, choose `Otel-Index` from the **Data sources** dropdown menu and `Simple Schema for Observability Index` from the **Otel index** dropdown menu. This step is shown in the following image.
```

> ![Metrics analytics page with dropdown menus]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/images/metrics/otel-metrics.png)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
![Metrics analytics page with OTel sources dropdown menus]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/images/metrics/otel-metrics.png)
```

---

> ## Accessing remote clusters to visualize remote metrics

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Visualizing metrics within remote clusters
```

Introduced 2.14
{: .label .label-purple }

> You can federate and view metrics from remote OpenSearch clusters by using the **Metrics analytics** tool. Select the database icon on the upper-right toolbar and choose the desired cluster listed in the **DATA SOURCES** dropdown menu, as shown in the following image. You can switch from a local cluster to a remote cluster.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can see metrics from remote OpenSearch clusters by using the **Metrics analytics** tool. Select the database icon on the upper-right toolbar and choose the cluster you want from **DATA SOURCES** dropdown menu, as shown in the following image. You can switch from a local cluster to a remote cluster.
```

> You can federate and view metrics from remote OpenSearch clusters by using the **Metrics analytics** tool. Select the dastabase icon on the upper-right toolbar and choose the desired cluster listed in the **DATA SOURCES** dropdown menu, as shown in the following image. You can switch from a local cluster to a remote cluster.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can federate and view metrics from remote OpenSearch clusters by using the **Metrics analytics** tool. Select the database icon on the upper-right toolbar and choose the desired cluster listed under the **DATA SOURCES** dropdown menu, as shown in the following image. You can switch from a local cluster to a remote cluster.
```

![Switching clusters]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/images/metrics/remote-cluster-selection.png)

> You can also federate remote metrics visualization alongside local metrics visualization. From the **DATA SOURCES** dropdown menu choose the remote metrics visualization to add it to the group of visualizations already shown on the dashboard. An example dashboard is shown in the following image.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can also view metrics visualizations from other sources together with local metrics visualizations. From the **DATA SOURCES** dropdown menu, choose the remote metrics visualization to add it to the group of visualizations already shown on the dashboard. An example dashboard is shown in the following image.
```

![Metrics dashboard]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/images/metrics/otel-metrics-remote-cluster-selection.png)

> To learn more about multi-cluster support for data sources, see [this GitHub issue](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch-Dashboards/issues/1388).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To learn about multi-cluster support for data sources, see the GitHub issues [Enable OpenSearch Dashboards to support multiple OpenSearch clusters](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch-Dashboards/issues/1388).
```

## Creating visualizations based on custom metrics

> You can create visualizations based on Prometheus metrics and custom metrics collected by your OpenSearch cluster.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can create visuals from the metrics data collected by your OpenSearch cluster, including Prometheus metrics and custom metrics.
```

> To create a visualization based on custom metrics, follow these steps:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To create these visualizations, follow these steps:
```

1. From the OpenSearch Dashboards main menu, navigate to **Observability** > **Metrics** > **Available Metrics**.
2. Choose the metrics to add to your visualization and then select **Save**.

> 3. When prompted for a **Custom operational dashboards/application**, choose one of the listed options. You can edit the predefined name values under the **Metric Name** fields.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. When prompted for a **Custom operational dashboards/application**, choose one of the listed options. You can edit the predefined name values in the **Metric Name** fields.
```

> 4. Select **Save** to save your visualization.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4. Select **Save** to save your visualization. An example visualization is shown in the following image.
```

> The following image is an example of the visualizations displayed in the **Observability** > **Metrics analytics** window.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
